---
title: "Scenario No.3"
categories:
  - Cluptrips
tags:
  - cluptrips
  - project
  - android
  - app
  - scenario

---

## No.3 – Success story of Business Manager Aleksander (Supplemental Persona)


Aleksander works in a club as business manager in Tallinn. Nowadays, the club's revenue has decreased and because of this situation, the club owner is so uneasy that he wants managers to research other clubs and make innovation for the club.

Thus, Aleksander thought the ways of research local clubs. Firstly, he searched local clubs around Tallinn via Google and tried to learn their events by entering the websites. But it doesn't work because they wouldn't publish events on the websites. Then he thought whether there was an app or not.

He searched "clubs" on the phone and saw "Club Trips" app. He downloaded it and typed "Tallinn" to search box. The list of events around Tallinn was showed up. There were clubs' events on that list and there was a considerable amount of participants. So, he thought it could be a good idea adding his clubs' events there.

He saw a link typed "If you are club owner" on App Explanation. Then he clicked it and registered himself as an admin via website. Then, he registered their clubs and added an upcoming event there.

The event was very successful. Even he didn't think an event came up with the result. He decided to use this app for every event.

After a couple of weeks, the revenue of club was doubled. And club owner congratulated Aleksander on his great success.

**Questions:**

* Is there something you would like to change in the scenario?
* Would you prefer to use the application instead of admin panel to add events?
* If yes, what is the reason you choose app?
* How much would you pay for this app to add events as a club owner?
* Does the app produce the same effect for any clubs?
