---
title: "Cluptrips Scenario No.1"
categories:
  - Cluptrips
tags:
  - cluptrips
  - project
  - android
  - app
  - scenario

---

## No.1 : A night out with a young graphic designer Hannah (Primary Persona)


**Hannah's Story:**

Hannah is a 24-year old freelance graphic designer from Germany, who spends her income on traveling. She tries to overlap her travel plans to electronic music festivals, but in case she cannot do that, she always goes out at night to see the Techno music scene in the country she is visiting.

It was a hot summer day in Novalja, Croatia. After a long day walking in Dolin, Hannah came home tired, but still decided to go out that night. Around a week ago, she and her friends attended a great music festival called Sonus, after which her friends left. Hannah had to stay a bit longer as her Croatian clients wanted her to do a branding identity design for their company.

Hannah opened her laptop and started searching for parties in her neighborhood. Facebook seemed to offer many events, but as she was not a local, she did not know which source to trust. She checked a couple of websites, but it seemed like the events of a listed clubs she liked were not taking place that night. It is true that Hannah had fun the last time she went out, but the music was disappointing, especially after a good electronic music festival.

It was getting darker outside and Hannah was losing enthusiasm when suddenly she saw an advertisement on Facebook: "Discover underground electronic music destinations anywhere you go". Just in case she went to the App Store and downloaded an application called "Club Trips" free. Without having too many expectations, she opened it and saw a cute character greeting her. The design of the interface made Hannah suddenly feel positive. Then a map opened up - showed her the venues around her, including house parties. She filtered the destinations according to the electronic music genre. Even though the choices narrowed down, she knew that they would be something she was looking forward to. Finally decided to go to club Kalypso, where Red Bull had a stage for a night.

After a great night out, with the music she appreciates and the party crew she enjoys to be surrounded by, Hannah got home happy and moved “Club Trips” from desktop to “Useful travel apps” folder.

**Questions:**

* What tools would you use for a party event search if you were Hannah?
* Have you ever used an app or a website for finding an event?
* If yes, what is the most important thing for you in terms of an app/website usability?
* In Hannah’s situation, would you trust an app to guide you in a foreign country?
* Would you rather choose an app that gives you few choices that will satisfy your exact needs or
* Would you prefer an application that gives you broad options, but only a few of them could suit you?
